Chahoa intended married couples to work together.
That's why Jesus used the expression we find at Matthew 19 and verse 6.
Let's read this from the Bible, Matthew 19, I'll give you a moment,
Matthew chapter 19, and we're going to read verse 6.
Now, first of all, Jesus quotes from Genesis 2.24.
He says, speaking of varied couples, he says, so that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
Now, you remember Chahoa made that comment in the Garden of Eden.
But now, Jesus adds something that isn't in Genesis.
He says, therefore, what God has yoked together, let no man put apart.
When we think of a yoke, we may think of a team of horses plowing a field or pulling a heavy wagon.
Now, if they pull together, they can be a powerful force.
The same is true when family members work together.
Mom, dad, you have excellent reasons to work together.
When you work together, you contribute to the peace of the family.
And think of the effect it has on the children.
By working together, you are teaching that fine young son of yours how to be a caring husband and father,
and your beautiful daughter, how to be a supportive wife and mother.
But what happens when teammates begin pulling in opposite directions or when one puts on the brakes?
Let's watch a video.
Now, here's the setup.
For a long time, a sister raised her two children as a single parent and she did a great job of it.
Then, she married a very kind brother. The family has a new head.
Let's see how well the sister is adapting to her new role.
The last few weeks of family worship have been nice. Right?
Yeah.
All these things we ask in praying, Jesus' name, amen.
Okay, this week.
We are in chapter 5.
Yeah, that's right. And last week gave bread, so this week...
It's suster.
That's right, it's suster.
Okay, the point here is that when it comes...
Honey, maybe an illustration would be better.
Um...
Okay.
It's like a bird.
Well, hopefully I was able to clear that up for you a little bit of Olivia.
Thank you.
Well, actually, Max, that's not true.
We had an updated understanding in the recent watchtower.
Thanks.
I think they went really well.
Right?
Um...
Actually.
Hey.
Maybe we can talk about it later.
Okay.
The sister isn't a bad person.
But we can ask, what's she teaching her daughter about the wife's role in the family?
And what's her son learning about taking the lead as the man of the house?
He hasn't had a man in his life for a long time.
No, there is one.
It's safe to say that the kids will stand a better chance of having a successful marriage themselves
when they see their parents pulling together.
A little later, we'll see how the husband handles the situation.
And we, brothers, are going to want to pay attention.
This is a classic.
Family life is more pleasant when dad, mom, and the kids work together as a team.
The family head is the captain.
He needs to make sure that everyone knows what goal is the family's working toward,
and how each one can contribute toward achieving those goals.
When it's your family's turn to help clean the kingdom hall, or a convention venue, for example,
don't leave the kids at home. They're part of the team.
Don't go there with half the team.
Let them experience the joy that comes from serving others.
Let them work along with you.
If you're assigned to clean the restrooms, don't complain about it.
A very fine example.
Her children will learn that, when there's work to be done, we just do it.
We aren't picky about what we will and will not do.
And we don't feel that some jobs are beneath us.
Now this is in line with Paul's counsel, found at Philippians chapter 2, verses 3 and 4.
Let's look that up.
Let's go to exercise.
Philippians chapter 2, verses 3 and 4.
Now we're thinking about the family as a team here.
It says, do nothing out of contentiousness, or out of egotism, but with humility, consider others superior to you,
as you will look out not only for your own interests, but also for the interests of others.
When there's work to be done, someone has to do it.
Do I think that I'm so special that someone else has to look after it?
Some families volunteer to help with kingdom hall maintenance.
When the kids are old enough, they can work on other projects like working on an assembly hall.
They have a ball.
The friendships that you and your young people will forge can last a lifetime.
And here's a bonus.
When the young people go to a circuit assembly or a regional convention, they'll have good friends to associate with, both young and old.
People they've been working with.
What about working around the house?
Some parents feel that the children shouldn't have to help out at all because they have their schoolwork to do.
But their schoolwork is something they do for themselves.
How are they contributing to the welfare of the family?
How are they learning to serve others unselfishly?
It's good for a child to feel that he has an important role in the household and that people are counting on him.
Think what that does for his self-respect.
A father named Stephen said,
When nothing is expected of them, children learn that they're here to be served.
And they grow up with a distorted view of what life will require of them.
We might ask, will a young person with that attitude even be able to keep a job?
When some of the world lose their job, they remain unemployed for a long time.
They can't pay the bills.
Yet there are job opportunities all around them.
But they consider those jobs beneath them.
And what's one of the most annoying traits an employee can have?
Ask any boss.
When the worker is asked to do something, he replies,
that's not my job.
Teach your child that anything that needs to be done is his job
if he's old enough and capable of doing it.
How early should parents start to assign chores to their children?
Some experts have found that children who are three years old
or even younger can be taught to help out.
They can learn to pick up their toys, clean up spills, sort laundry.
Older children can vacuum, wash the car, prepare a meal.
I'm happy to say that many young brothers here at Bethel are excellent cooks,
which is often the result of fine parental training.
Do you remember the video where Caleb is taught to clean his room and put away his toys?
That video was a game changer for many children.
They want to be just like Caleb.
And now, when you enter their room, you can find the bed.
When problems arise, attack the problem, not each other.
It's not how can I win, but how can we win?
You'll see an excellent example of that in the follow-up video.
Let's watch.
Want some tea?
Sure.
Hey, babe. You and me.
We're a team, right?
Yeah, of course.
When I read this, I thought about us.
So that they are no longer two, but one flesh.
I know before you had to shoulder everything yourself for so long.
And you did great.
You've been raising two beautiful, spiritual kids on your own.
But now you have me.
Yeah, I do.
So, do you think sometimes we're not a team?
Well, it's just sometimes our family worship.
I get excited and I jump in.
I know I'm just so used to doing it after all these years.
I know you're not trying to take over and listen.
I love the way you teach.
I see how you can reach the kids in ways that I can't.
Just let me guide it.
And I'll make sure you can do that.
Thanks, honey.
Thanks for your patience.
No, thank you for your patience.
I'm a work in progress, but we make a great team.
Why don't we look at what we're going to cover before our next family worship?
That sounds great.
Wasn't that a fine example of how to attack a problem?
Not your mate.
No arguments.
No raised voices.
No accusations.
The husband had empathy for his wife.
He didn't question her motives.
He realized that as a single parent, she'd been taking the lead for a long time.
And notice how she responded to her husband's kind counsel.
No doubt, it's going to be easy for the kids to respect their stepfather.
And they're going to learn how a husband and wife should treat each other
and how they should pull together.
Sometimes soon, you might want to consider these questions.
In what aspects of our marriage do we work well as a team?
And then how can we improve?
It pleases Jehovah when family members work together as a team.
That promotes peace in the family.
And our God is a God of peace.
Now, Brother John Echron will consider the final talk of this symposium.
Follow the road map to family peace.
Worship Jehovah together.